


Editorial 	The missing link 	Jean Van Wetter  Managing director	Delphine Moralis  Chairperson of the Board
Enabel has some ambitious goals laid out in the #ActForImpact strategy. One of the goals is ‘Beyond Aid’.  How should we understand this? By 2050, one person in four in the world will be African. By 2100, it will be almost one in two. These are the facts. While the European population is ageing and stagnating, the median age in Africa is 20 years. So the development of the African continent is an extraordinary opportunity for Europe and the world. Africa is a hotbed of creativity and innovation, and we are convinced that the great inventions of tomorrow will come from Africa. In this context, our cooperation model needs to be completely transformed, and we are proud of Enabel’s recent changes in strategy and attitude in that regard. It has long since ceased to be about North-South relations; it is now about fully fledged partnerships with the countries of Africa and the Middle East, about collaboration among equals, about shared ideas and innovation that by no means comes only from ‘our side’. We also have long since stopped talking only about what expertise we have to offer as an agency. Our role has evolved and we now offer Belgian and even European know-how too. Belgium has high-quality expertise at the institutional level, in certain themes and sectors, industries, etc. And this is what our partners are looking for: know-how and experience in areas beyond development cooperation. In Belgium, for example, large quantities of vaccines are produced. Our scientific research into vaccines is world class; our regulatory framework for the production and sale of vaccines is reliable. It is the combination of those elements, a kind of pharmaceutical ecosystem that we are trying to create with Senegal, Rwanda and the African Union. In order to be able to do so, you need to work with a great many different partners. We are gradually succeeding in assuming that role of ‘broker’, in gaining recognition as the ‘hub’ of Belgian and European expertise. Along with our partners in Africa and the Middle East, we go out in search of the most appropriate Belgian expertise at various ministries and institutions, so we can work on such an ecosystem. It could be in health care, education, urban development, security?–?you name it. Enabel has signed dozens of collaboration agreements with Belgian government departments, research institutions, knowledge centres and universities. Is it difficult to get them to buy into your story? All partners must, of course, find some added value in such a collaboration; otherwise, they will drop out. We need to explain more and better on that front what that added value could be for the Belgian players. There is a role here for politics and the media, which can help promote this more modern vision of international collaboration. We need to explain to the general public that Africa is a continent of opportunity, a hotbed of ideas, of innovation. Belgian experts from our ministries can usefully share their knowledge and experience with their African colleagues?–?and from this collaboration, they will draw at least as much inspiration and motivation for their own work. For this country, such partnerships are also strategically interesting because they create a certain impression of Belgium and strengthen our credibility abroad. We should not view development cooperation as something com-pulsory, or like a form of charity. It is a strategic tool for Belgian priorities?–?part of the ten-year vision that Belgium should have. There must be a link between development cooperation and the knowledge that Belgium wants to develop in a number of chosen sectors, such as renewable energy (offshore wind farms, green hydrogen), vaccines, innovative social approaches, etc. How would you describe Enabel’s DNA? What characterises us is that?–?in all modesty?–?we have a good knowledge of the countries and the context in which we work. Our financial resources are what they are, but our greatest riches are our staff members. Ninety percent of our personnel work in the 21 countries where we operate and on the projects. The knowledge and knowhow they have are priceless. But our expertise extends much further: thanks to collaboration agreements with government departments and research centres, Enabel can offer an incredible wealth of knowledge in a wide variety of sectors.Thirdly, we have the great advantage of being present in the ministries where decisions are made, and we also collaborate with local governments in the practical implementation of projects, where decisions are turned into reality. In recent years, we have perhaps focused a little too much on project operation, with not enough regard for that institutional leverage. This is where we need to catch up in the coming years, because it is at the institutional level that you really set things in motion. What other changes are you proposing to stay relevant? Looking ahead to our 2030 ambitions, we are on track and have already come a long way. But to remain relevant, we need to knock down some walls. More than ever, we need to collaborate with other players, with the business world, organisations, the diaspora, government agencies, etc. What we call ‘development’ is certainly not the monopoly of agencies like Enabel. To develop a country, to create prosperity, the government, business and civil society must work together. Everyone has their role to play, and it is best to do that together, not side by side. First of all, let’s talk about international collaboration, on an equal footing with our partners, making determined choices and, with full conviction as Team Belgium, using the expertise of our whole country, including?–?and without being naïve?–?the private sector. And without forgetting the diaspora. Equally importantly, we must have the honesty and courage to remind our partners of their duties and to make them take greater responsibility. If a project is going pear-shaped or is at risk of being hijacked, we should have the courage to pull the plug. For example, if you want to support a country’s education system to make it more efficient or to implement reforms, and you know that teachers are paid little or nothing, then you know that you are heading straight for failure, right? Why should we not be allowed to impose prior conditions, so that teachers must first be paid a decent wage before we start supporting the education system? We should sometimes be able to be more selective, and more flexible when the context demands it. There is no reason at all why ‘our’ sector?–?the industry of international collaboration?–?should maintain different rules than a development project in Belgium. Traditional development cooperation must be ‘de-industrialised’. No single notion of a development worker exists. We do not work for our own honour and glory, but to make a difference where we can. Recently, at a meeting of Belgian export services and Belgian and Congolese entrepreneurs from the diaspora, we were bothered to note that they do not know of our agency, even though we are natural allies for working?–?in this case?–?with Congo. It makes no sense to work side-by-side and remain blind to one another. People from the diaspora invest in their countries of origin through remittances, and sometimes take up influential positions in their countries’ government structures. This is also important for our work. But we are learning. In our ‘classical’ projects, we ensure that vocational training in a country is better matched to the needs of the labour market, in collaboration with the educational world, employment services and the business world. We are also implementing a number of projects that experiment with so-called professional mobility. In Senegal and the Ivory Coast, we are working with employers’ associations to look for promising small entrepreneurs, whom we then put in contact with companies in Belgium so they can exchange ideas and explore new markets together. At the same time, we are putting the West African diaspora in Belgium in contact with organisations in Senegal and the Ivory Coast so they will be encouraged to invest in their countries and launch or support economic activities. Do you have the appropriate tools to put this new evolution into practice? We need to adapt our tools to reality. To date, our main tool has been the gift?–?financial support to countries in trouble. But Africa is a continent of  54 countries, and all those countries have their own face, their own character, their own context. There are vulnerable countries where the risks are greater?–?just think of the countries in the Sahel. But there are also countries like Senegal, Rwanda or Uganda where you can use other tools. Even within the same country, you can have huge regional differences in terms of security and prosperity. The trend is that people are moving more and more to the cities, that cities will develop faster, and that urban-rural inequality will increase. We need to expand our range to respond appropriately to each specific situation. Perhaps a regional approach might make more sense, rather than working at the country level. What can an agency like Enabel actually do? Your operating revenue is 340 million euros. In itself, of course, this is a lot of money, but it is ‘only’ as much as the annual budget of a city hospital in Brussels. Over the past few years, our turnover has risen sharply, from 227 million euros in 2018 to 340 in 2022. This is a significant increase that we can achieve thanks to the Belgian governmental cooperation because we leverage it to tap into other sources of funding as well. Not only is that good for Enabel, it also contributes to Belgium’s image abroad. Of course, we must remain humble and realistic. We are not going to integrate Africa with the resources at our disposal. But if we make smart use of those resources, we can make a difference. Our strength is that we provide institutional support, as a priority partner of government departments in the countries where we work. We can really initiate change there at the source, by putting our experts in the ministries. Our national programme in Mozambique, for example, is modest, but our climate finance expert in the Ministry of Finance advises the Mozambican government on how to get its climate plans funded. That has an impact.
Identity card The Belgian development agency Enabel implements the Belgian governmental cooperation. The agency also works for other national and international donors.Operations Preparation and launch of new cooperation 
programmesCountry strategies In 2022, strategies for eight partner countries were prepared: DR Congo, Uganda, Tanzania, Mozambique, Morocco, Burkina Faso, Benin and Guinea. These strategies are the prelude to future cooperation programmes taking into account achievements and non-achievements of earlier cooperation programmes. Signing of new cooperation programmes In 2022, the Belgian State committed to implementing four new cooperation programmes: in DR Congo (EUR 250 million), Uganda (EUR 68 million), Mozambique (EUR 25 million) and Tanzania (EUR 25 million). Cooperation with these countries aims to structurally and sustainably improve the living conditions of vulnerable groups living in poverty.  In the DR Congo, cooperation focuses on four pillars: valorising young people, improving access to social services, improving food security and promoting good governance and human rights. In Uganda, over the next five years, we will continue to focus on vocational training and decent work and access to social services and local governance. In Mozambique, we are strengthening institutional partners and guiding them towards a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy. Finally, in Tanzania, in the Kigoma region, we will assist girls and young women in finding decent and green jobs. In all countries, special attention is paid to vulnerable communities in rural and urban areas. Launch of cooperation programmesThe two regional programmes (Climate in the Sahel and Social Protection in Central Africa) and the cooperation programmes with Palestine and Niger signed in 2021 for a five-year period effectively started in 2022.  The main objective of the Climate in the Sahel thematic programme (EUR 50 million) is to improve the integrated management of natural resources and the sustainable restoration of ecosystems in an area of 400 km? in the Sahel region. This programme is part of the fight against desertification and the negative impact of climate change. The aim is to strengthen the resilience of more than 600,000 people living under difficult conditions in vulnerable parts of the Sahel region, namely in Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger.  The Social Protection in Central Africa thematic programme (EUR 50 million) includes projects in the Democratic Republic Congo, in Rwanda and in Uganda. 60,000 people will receive better social protection and 20,000 jobseekers will be accompanied towards better and decent employment. More than two million people are informed about rights and standards at work, as well as about proper social protection. Some activities will also be in collaboration with Burundian partners  The cooperation programme in Palestine (EUR 70 million) will effectively start in 2022 after a study and inception phase. Over the next five years, this programme focuses on empowering young people and on climate and the environment. Together with the Palestinian partners, the aim is to accompany, train and employ 27,000 Palestinian youth so that they become active and critical citizens. Enabel also aims to reduce the ecological footprint and greenhouse gas emissions of 1.6 million Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.  The cooperation programme in Niger (EUR 50 million) was launched quickly to ensure continuity with the expiring programme. Like that programme, the new programme aims to promote social protection and social equality, and agro-pastoral development and entrepreneurship among young people.New projects for other donorsBesides the four new programmes commissioned by the Belgian state, in 2022 Enabel signed agreements with the European Union, Wallonia, the Brussels-Capital Region, the Netherlands, LuxDev, AFD and Sweden’s SIDA to strengthen our programmes in 11 countries, including Côte d’Ivoire, Mauritania and Tunisia. In total, these 27 new contracts amount to a total budget of EUR 213 million. 43% of new contracts regard the fight against social and economic inequalities; 30% regard the fight against climate change; 15% regard human mobility challenges; and 12% regard peace and security. Transition to new Management Contract As part of the new Management Contract binding the Hub of international cooperation  in BelgiumThe growing number of Belgian and European projects and the increased cooperation with other agencies and organisations strengthen Enabel’s position as a key European player.Belgian State and Enabel, which starts from 1 January 2023, more flexibility and efficiency in the programming cycle is now envisaged. With fewer steps during the cooperation programme preparation phase, simplified processes, more concise documents and a more prominent place for the partner, partner involvement is to be increased and sustainability is to be ensured. Moreover, the pursuit of a ‘Comprehensive Approach’ within a Belgian and European framework should further improve the coherence of Belgian assistance.
This evolution is in line with Enabel’s ambition to position itself as the hub of international cooperation in Belgium. Enabel’s offices become a meeting place for the agencies that are involved in European initiatives. The physical presence of such ‘European’ staff in Enabel’s offices facilitates collaboration, the exchange of experience, coherence, innovation and efficiency in project implementation. The location of Enabel’s offices in Brussels within walking distance of the European institutions is another asset of the agency.For Belgium There is a number of projects that we carry out on behalf of the Belgian Minister of Development Cooperation. The Junior Programme offers young experts the opportunity to start working in international cooperation. The Trade for Development Centre promotes fair trade at home and abroad and organises the Fair Trade Week every year in October. The BeGlobal programme (formerly Kruit and Annoncer la Couleur) advises and coaches the education sector in Belgium on Global Citizenship Education. Wehubit is a financing facility promoting digital technologies in support of promising digital social innovation projects in Africa and the Middle East (co-funded since 2022 by the EU). The Awa Prize was established in 2022 to promote women entrepreneurship in Africa and the Middle East. European partnershipsSome EU-funded projects with activities in Africa and in Belgium aim at assisting professional mobility (of entrepreneurs or of workers) between Belgium and Senegal, Côte d’Ivoire, Morocco and Tunisia: the Project for the Entrepreneurial Mobility between Senegal and Belgium (PEM Wecco’), the Project for Entrepreneurial Mobility between Ivory Coast and Belgium (PEM CIV), and Towards a Holistic Approach to Labour Migration Governance and Labour Mobility in North Africa (THAMM - Morocco and Tunisia). These projects are implemented in cooperation with partners in Belgium and partner countries (Flemish Region, Walloon Region, Egmont Institute, Fedasil, the Immigration Office, employers’ organisations, employment services), the International Organisation for Migration and the International Labour Organisation. These projects have staff in the countries listed, as well as in Enabel’s offices in Brussels.Still other projects are funded by several partners and implemented by various agencies, sometimes through a purpose-specific consortium. The African Union–European Union Digital for Development (D4D) Hub is a project that supports African institutions to create an enabling environment for an inclusive and sustainable digital transformation. It does so by providing demand-driven technical assistance, promoting knowledge sharing, and facilitating multi-stakeholder dialogues. The project is financed by the EU and EU Member States. It is implemented by Enabel, GIZ, Estonia, AFD, Expertise France and LuxDev. Its secretariat is based in Enabel’s offices. VET Toolbox is an international Vocational Education & Training partnership that aims at strengthening vocational education and training and at better alignment with labour market needs. It is financed by the EU and Germany and implemented by Enabel, GIZ, Expertise France, LuxDev and the British Council. Its secretariat is based in Enabel’s offices. The Team Europe Democracy (TED) is an initiative of the EU and 14 Member States, including Belgium, which aims to support democracy by better coordinating European projects (including on anti-corruption, civic participation, transparent governance, fair elections and free media). The project is implemented by Enabel and GIZ; part of the secretariat is based in Enabel’s offices. Invest in Young Businesses in Africa (IYBA) is a European initiative that aims to promote a fertile business environment in sub-Sahara Africa in which young businesses and entrepreneurs (especially young people and women) can grow and create jobs. IYBA has three components, of which the SEED (Supporting Entrepreneurial Ecosystem Development) part focuses on capacity building, networking and the exchange of experience. It is implemented by  5 agencies (Enabel, Expertise France, GIZ, SlovakAid and SNV) in Senegal, Togo, Benin, Kenya and South Africa. The sixmember project team, comprising people from the various agencies, is based in Enabel’s offices. Belgium takes a key role in European initiative to boost African Vaccine ManufacturingMAV+ (Manufacturing and Access to Vaccines, Medicines and Health Technology Products in Africa) is a European initiative that saw the light in the wake of the corona pandemic, and in which Belgium has taken a leading role through its expertise and bilateral, non-governmental and multilateral funding. MAV+ is to promote production of and access to vaccines, medicines and health technologies in Africa. In collaboration with the African Union and the European Union, it aims to increase African vaccine production to 60% of Africa’s vaccine needs by 2040. After negotiations between the administration, Germany, France and the European Commission, the technical implementation of the initiative was entrusted to a consortium of three European agencies: Enabel, Expertise France and GIZ. Enabel ensures the coordination. The activities aim to guide the EU, Member States, the African Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (Africa CDC) and the African Partnership for Vaccine Production (PAVM) on pharmaceutical regulation, technology transfer and intellectual property, industrial development and cooperation with the private sector, as well as research and capacity development. Among other things, this should lead to national regulatory instances eventually attaining a level of quality (‘maturity level 3’ in World Health Organisation terminology) allowing them to decide on market access for vaccines produced in Africa. To this end, collaboration in Belgium is ensured with Sciensano, the Federal Agency for Medicines and Health Products (FAMHP) and QUAMED (Quality Medicine for All). Other activities include the material equipment of laboratories, the digitalisation of the operation of African agencies, and the establishment of a master’s degree in biotechnology at the University of Rwanda in cooperation with the Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB). Thanks to complementary parallel Belgian funding to the European initiative, Enabel will also support the African Medicines Agency (AMA) and the equitable access to quality health products in Africa. The coordination team, comprising about 10 people from Enabel, Expertise France and GIZ, is based in Enabel’s offices. 

Partnerships for more expertise and enhanced impactFor Enabel, partnerships with the public sector, the private sector and civil society  are essential. Partnerships help multiply the impact of cooperation projects in  partner countries. On the one hand, Enabel has succeeded in positioning itself as a key ally of partner country public services. On the other hand, Enabel signed some sixty partnership agreements with Belgian public instances, universities and research centres. Most of these partnerships materialise in the provision of Belgian public expertise, knowledge exchange, joint activities or events and networking. In this context, Enabel acts as a hub of Belgian expertise and facilitates the pooling of expertise of Belgian institutions and ‘sister’ institutions in the partner countries in Africa and the Middle East. More partnerships: AFD, LuxDev, Brussels, Wallonia In November 2022, Enabel and the AFD Group which includes the French development agency and Expertise France, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for increased cooperation between European development agencies to address the global challenges that people face in Africa and the Middle East. The MoU was signed as part of EQUITE, a five-year project of Enabel and the AFD Group aimed at improving the health of the most vulnerable in Benin. In the same month, Enabel and Luxembourg Development Cooperation signed a partnership that strengthens Enabel’s projects in agriculture and sustainable food systems. The Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is providing additional funding for actions carried out by Enabel in Rwanda and Benin. These partnerships are in line with the new European cooperation architecture and the Team Europe approach. Furthermore, on the occasion of the November 2022 COP27 Climate Conference in Egypt, the BrusselsCapital Region and the Walloon Region announced allocating additional funds to finance Enabel climate projects in Senegal, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Rwanda, Palestine and Mozambique. By pooling expertise, the partnerships allow for network exchange of competence and experience and offer Belgian experts and experts from partner countries opportunities to innovate. Such collaboration, facilitated by Enabel, is intended to be ‘win-win-win’: in other words, with added value for the stakeholders of the cooperation projects, for the public authorities of the partner countries and for the Belgian public partners. In most cases, Enabel facilitates the provision of expertise from public institutions for projects that focus on strengthening and developing the capacities of public partners in the countries of intervention. Public partnerships promote sustainable peer-to-peer collaboration and provide a comparative advantage for our partner countries and institutions, as part of a Comprehensive Approach to international cooperation. To illustrate these partnerships, let us take the agricultural sector, where partnerships relate to food safety, innovation and research, among others. In Guinea, Mauritania and Benin, the capacities of the institutions and ministries in charge of food safety control are strengthened by the Belgian Food Agency (AFSCA/FAVV) and Sciensano through exchange visits and on-site training. VITO is being mobilised with a view to strengthening biomass monitoring systems for grazing areas in Niger. Finally, several food production, conservation and processing initiatives are underway with Belgian and international universities and research centres (ULiège, UCLouvain, KULeuven, UGent, CIRAD, IRD, etc.) supporting innovation. #EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-2023Enabel promotes women entrepreneurship  in Africa and the Middle EastFor the Belgian Development Cooperation promoting women entrepreneurship is an important lever to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). At the initiative  of Belgium’s Minister of Development Cooperation and Major Cities Enabel has launched 
the Awa Prize.With this award, Belgium aims to reward promising initiatives by women entrepreneurs in Africa and the Middle East and promote women’s leadership. Out of 2,400 entries from 16 countries the Belgian Development Cooperation selected twelve laureates, in four categories: start-up, scale-up, innovation and a People’s Choice Prize. The four winners are from Morocco, Mali, Rwanda and Burundi. They were awarded their prize at the official ceremony on 26 January 2023 in the presence of Her Majesty Queen Mathilde and Minister of Development Cooperation and Major Cities Caroline Gennez.Emancipation over inequality Globally, one in three companies is owned by a woman. In sub-Saharan Africa, most self-employed people are women. In societies where paid employment prospects are limited or non-existent, entrepreneurship is often the main livelihood for men and women. For women, it is a lever for financial empowerment whose positive effects are also felt in the family. After all, when a woman becomes an entrepreneur, she generates additional income for her household and strengthens her position within the family. Almost 90% of the income women generate through their businesses is reinvested for the benefit of the family or the local community and thus by extension for the whole of society. But women, more often than men, face obstacles on their way to entrepreneurship. These are not always easy to overcome. Sometimes it is about legal inequality: in some countries, women are not allowed to manage a bank account or start a business without their husband’s consent. In sub-Saharan Africa, North Africa and the Middle East, less than 40% of women have bank accounts. In some places, entrepreneurship is seen as an unacceptable activity for a woman. Social norms can lead to a lack of self-confidence and can discourage women from starting a business. By promoting promising women entrepreneurs as role models, the Awa Prize aims to demystify women’s entrepreneurship. The award aims to show to both men and women that entrepreneurship can be synonymous with social success, personal development and positive effects on communities, while maintaining the balance in the household. Role modelsAminata Simpara Winner in the Start-up  category - Mali.She is the founder and director of N’terini, a company based in the capital, Bamako. In 2021 it started manufacturing washable and reusable sanitary pads. With her business Aminata offers a ready-made solution to address the taboo of menstrual insecurity. In Mali, many girls cannot afford sanitary pads and often do not go to school during their period. In less than two years, Aminata’s business has reached 5,000 clients and created six direct jobs.Rim Machhour Winner in the Innovation  category - Morocco.She was awarded the Awa Prize in the Innovation category. In 2021 Rim Machhour co-founded Dealkhir.ma, a solidarity e-commerce business. Online shoppers are encouraged through the Dealkhir platform to make a donation to a social community project. Dealkhir can offer such deals thanks to strong partnerships with companies. In two years of time Rim Machhour has succeeded in forging 60 deals, benefiting 8 social projects.This first Awa Prize contest ran from October to December 2022. More than 2,400 entries from 16 countries were assessed on a variety of criteria (including quality, relevance, motivation, inclusion, feasibility, climate- friendliness...). Among these, 80 women entrepreneurs were selected, and of these 80, 12 finalists were eventually chosen following interviews with a jury in which the Belgian Development Cooperation, the Belgian Investment Company for Developing Countries (BIO) and Belgian entrepreneurs were represented. The People’s Choice Prize was awarded via online voting. The laureates of the Awa Prize receive professional coaching, including networking opportunities and personal competence development, during a one- week Credia Umuhire Ruzigana Winner in the Scale-up  category - Rwanda.Credia (25) is the founder and director of Imanzi Creations, a company that since 2019 produces novels, comic books and board games that bring forgotten tales and heroes of Rwanda’s rich past to life. Rwanda has few libraries and publishers, making access to reading difficult. Credia actively promotes literacy in a country where reading is not a widespread pastime.Kathia Iradukunda Winner of the People’s Choice Prize - Burundi.Kathia (26) is passionate about environmental protection. She launched her business in 2021 to fight the invasive water hyacinth in Lake Tanganyika. The Hyacinth Art House collects water hyacinths in the Lake and uses them for art products (baskets, carpets, table pieces...). It thus contributes to clearing Lake Tanganyika, promoting Burundian crafts and empowering women. In less than two years, the Hyacinth Art House has already removed more than 5 tonnes of water hyacinth and trained 100 women in weaving techniques.stay in Belgium, To further grow their business, they are also professionally coached for one year in their country. Scan the code to watch the after movie of the first edition of the Awa Prize


Award-winning sustainable architectureFor many years, sustainable architecture has been one of the means put forward by Enabel and its partners to deal with climate change while improving the comfort of users.
This form of bioclimatic architecture relies on the optimisation of building orientation, shading, natural lighting and ventilation, energy efficiency and rainwater harvesting systems and uses renewable energy and local low carbon materials. It includes the use bamboo, natural stones and compressed earth bricks or bricks fired with more environmental-friendly processes. It also uses nature-based techniques, ancestral know-how and local culture by drawing on local typologies. These approaches are typical of the architecture pursued by Enabel in countries such as Palestine, Rwanda or Senegal. In the case of Uganda, they are applied through a programme to build technical and teacher training schools, financed by Belgium for the past seven years and implemented by the Ugandan Ministry of Education and Sports and Enabel. The programme aims to contribute to improving the training facilities of lower secondary school teacher trainees from the five national teacher training colleges. It culminated in winning the architecture Public Choice Award at the 2022 Architizer A+ Awards for the renovation of the Mubende and Kaliro National Teachers Colleges located in central and eastern Uganda respectively. The main contractors for this project were Oubuntu Consulting and DASUDA & bkvv architects. The Architizer A+ Awards celebrate the extraordinary work of the world’s best firms, highlighting the work of pioneering architects and designers as they strive to create architecture that will stand the test of time. 5,000 entries from more than 100 countries were received for the 2022 awards. Out of these, a jury nominated five finalists per category. The Public Choice Winners were awarded in several categories, with over 400,000 votes cast by the voting public. The Mubende and Kaliro infrastructure project will feature in the next edition of “The World’s Best Architecture” published annually by the Monacelli Press. The project renovated 24 buildings and constructed 8 new facilities. These included student and staff accommodation, classrooms, study spaces and sports grounds and equipment. To ensure ownership and sustainability, the participation of the local and educational community was sought from the outset. Special attention was given to making the kitchens energy-efficient. These have a biodigester system for gas production, thermal solar panels for hot water production and improved ovens, all of which reduce fuel wood consumption by almost 50%. Other adapted technologies such as a solar-powered water borehole, solar street lighting and a selective sorting waste management system are also used. With these facilities, the project offers an inspiring, safer and more comfortable learning environment for more than 2,000 learners and teachers and the principles of environmental protection and the fight against climate change are placed at the heart of the educational project. 2023-2027 Cooperation Programme between Belgium and DR Congo focuses on youth and womenOn 19 December 2022, Belgium and the Democratic Republic of Congo signed a new Cooperation Programme investing in the future of Congolese youth and womeBesides projects that accompany students in primary education, vocational training and young people in decent work and entrepreneurship, the programme also focuses on making health care accessible, also financially, and on fighting sexual violence. Furthermore, the promotion of sustainable agriculture, the protection of Congo’s forests and good governance are central in the programme. Almost half the population in Congo is under 15 years old. 68% is younger than 25. There is enormous potential in that. The cooperation programme aims to give as many Congolese youth as possible every opportunity to get an education, find a good job or start their own business. Gender equality and women’s rights also remain a priority. Renewed support goes to care centres where women who were victims of sexual violence can safely recover physically and mentally. Extra attention goes to making sexual and reproductive health care accessible and to initiatives that keep girls and young women in school or vocational training for longer. 57 million people – almost two in three Congolese – live in extreme poverty. They have to live on less than 1.20 euro a day. Rising food and energy prices are making it even more difficult for many families to buy enough food or pay for necessary health care. The World Bank estimates that half of Congolese children are malnourished. That is why Belgium is helping to build a better-functioning health insurance system and why vulnerable farming families receive tailor-made advice and assistance to make their farms more environmentally friendly, sustainable and profitable. Congo plays a key role in the fight against global warming. Forests in the Congo Basin are among the largest carbon stocks in the world. Family farming is one of the main drivers behind deforestation as farmers burn down patches down to develop new fields. The Belgian Development Cooperation is committed to protecting the forest and developing sustainable and more efficient agriculture. Part of the Cooperation Programme also focuses on improving the functioning of democracy and the rule of law in Congo. Political participation of the Congolese is fostered through support to civil society, and it should become easier for citizens to hold the central, provincial and local authorities accountable. Cooperation Programme activities are taking place in 9 Congolese provinces: Tshopo, South-Ubangi, Kasai Oriental, Lomami, Haut-Katanga, Lualaba, South-Kivu, Maniema and Kinshasa. The Belgian Development Cooperation has been present for years in most of them. The activities benefit more than 16 million Congolese. Belgian assistance has produced tangible results over the past decade: 82,000 Congolese youth attended primary school or vocational training. The number of girls and young women in school or training increased by 74%. More than 6 million people obtained access to health care. More than 4,500 victims of sexual violence were helped in care centres. 50,000 smallholder farms made the transition to a more environmentally friendly way of working and saw their revenue increase, sometimes by as much as 80%. The Cooperation Programme runs from 2023 to 2027 and amounts to EUR 50 million a year. No development without securityA country must ensure the security of its citizens. Human security is a fundamental public good, as is access to healthcare, education or food.The Sahel region is a fragile zone due to different factors such as extreme poverty, weak state structures and climate change. Moreover, since the early 2010s, there has been an increased presence of jihadist and other armed groups in the region, such as al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), Boko Haram and the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (IS-GS). This has led to increasing insecurity and instability in the region. The armed groups carry out attacks on civilians, government officials and military personnel and use violence to control territory. In the process, they destroy security posts, schools and telecommunications infrastructure. They undermine the role and credibility of the state and present themselves as alternatives for protecting the population and managing infrastructure. With a view to stabilising the security situation in the Sahel region and addressing the threat of jihadism, the situation receives increased international attention. The 2022-2027 cooperation programme between Belgium and Niger focuses on four themes: social security and combating inequality; livestock breeding with a focus on rural entrepreneurship; environment and climate; and security. The government of Niger has requested support of the international community to stabilise the Torodi Department, which has been ravaged by armed gangs and jihadists. The area lies on the traffic axis linking the capital Niamey with Burkina Faso and Benin. The State of Niger wants to restore its presence there, strengthen social cohesion and improve government services. For the government, it is important that the fight against terrorism is combined with development programmes that improve the living conditions of the 260,000 inhabitants of the Torodi Department and ensure that the state continues to play its role so that people’s confidence in public services is strengthened and the economy is boosted. In response to this request, Belgium was one of the first countries to pioneer the 3D approach, with Belgian Defence, Diplomacy and Development working together to provide coherent support. Belgian Diplomacy has privileged contacts with the authorities of Niger through its Ambassador, so that a permanent check can be made on whether the activities are properly aligned with Niger’s strategic priorities. This serves the sustainability of the actions. © Enabel - Tim Dirven	© Enabel - Tim Dirven Belgian Defence supports the armed forces of Niger in becoming more autonomous and resilient. The support consists of training, advice and the provision of nonlethal equipment (individual equipment including helmets, binoculars, clothing, sleeping gear, night vision equipment, communication tools, vehicles, navigation equipment). Belgian Defence is also involved in the construction of new barracks in the Torodi Department, from which Niger will conduct its operations in the zone. With the presence of other internal security services (police, gendarmerie, national guard), this support should ensure that the local population regains confidence in its security forces, which is only possible if they manage to guarantee security.  The Belgian Development Cooperation, through Enabel, commissioned a thorough analysis of the socioeconomic situation in Torodi. The needs of the population form the basis for the municipal development and investment plans. Enabel supports the realisation of those plans. The intention is to work with the local administration in Torodi on access to healthcare, education and economic activities (production and sales of vegetables and livestock). These rapid impact actions are combined with awareness-raising campaigns for peace, civic engagement and social cohesion.The 3D initiative is not going unnoticed, with the EU providing extra funds to support the Belgian pilot project. The ‘European’ activities include the construction of a commissariat and the supply of equipment (furniture, computers, bullet-proof vests, binoculars, transport equipment...) so that the national security services can carry out their mission in the region.* |  3D approach = way of working where Diplomacy, Defence and Development Cooperation together draw up an integrated programme.Supporting the green transition  in MozambiqueAs climate change and its impacts continue picking up pace, 2022 was also a year during which the global green transition gained unprecedented momentum. For the first time in history, capital investments in renewable energy projects exceeded investment in upstream oil and gas.Landmark climate policy packages were prepared and adopted in both the US (US Inflation Reduction Act) and the EU (EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism and EU Green Deal Industrial Plan). Both packages include hefty financial support measures for scaling up the production and roll out of clean technologies, which have the potential to redefine global trade relationships, commodity markets as well as economic opportunities.Leaving no one behindWithin this rapidly evolving space, there is a risk that low-income countries will be faced with new and additional challenges. In the case of Mozambique, the Center for Global Development has for instance calculated that the introduction of the EU’s Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism may knock off 1.5% of the country’s GDP. Similarly, the global call to phase down unabated coal will negatively affect Mozambique’s coal mining communities, which in 2022 accounted for over 20% of export earnings. The global green transition will, however, also create new opportunities. Mozambique holds unique renewable energy resources and large deposits of critical minerals, which, if well applied, can put the country on a sustainable development pathway that is in sync with global developments.Mapping out transition pathwaysTo ensure Mozambique can tap into the opportunities of the global green transition and mitigate its potentially negative impacts, Enabel in close collaboration with other partners is supporting the Government of Mozambique to start mapping out transition pathways that are just. In particular, Enabel has been focusing on three components: institutional strengthening, facilitating dialogues and testing innovative financing.Facilitating dialogues and coordination Mapping out transition pathways towards a net zero and climate-resilient future is a daunting task. It requires broad stakeholder dialogues and coordination to ensure that no one is left behind.Enabel has been actively contributing to the creation of stakeholder platforms at the national level as well as supporting the Government to meaningfully participate in international fora. Since 2021, Enabel together with the UK has been co-chairing the Coalition of the Willing on Climate Change and Resilience, a newly established platform of donor partners that are committed to pushing forward a high-level dialogue with the Government of Mozambique on topics related to climate change and resilience.Also at the national level, Enabel is working with the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change towards the establishment of a High-level Energy Transition Task Force, which will be mandated to elaborate a just energy transition strategy and investment plan for the country. At the international level, Enabel in close collaboration with the NDC Partnership and the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change supported Mozambique’s participation at COP27, including the organization of a high-level  side event which counted on the participation of  Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, President of Mozambique, Sir Tony Blair, Executive Chairman of the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, Mr. Akinwumi Adesina, President of the AfDB, Ambassador Richard Duke, Deputy US Special Presidential Envoy for Climate, and Ms. Mafalda Duarte, Head of the Climate Investment Funds. The event was moderated by Damilola Ogunbiyi, CEO of SEforAll. Institutional strengtheningEnabel is also working with embedded advisors in the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Energy to provide day-to-day capacity support for exploring economic opportunities and policy options in areas such as climate finance, carbon pricing, sovereign insurance against climate disasters, e-mobility, off-grid energy, hydrogen, circular economy and climate-smart agriculture. Mobilizing climate finance and piloting innovative financing mechanisms Enabel is also supporting the Government of Mozambique with the mobilization of the necessary financial resources to start making the green transition a reality, including through piloting innovative financing mechanisms. In 2022, Enabel worked with the Ministry of Environment and the National Fund for Sustainable Development for the mobilization of EUR 18.7 million of climate finance to support investments in sustainable waste treatment and recycling plants. The programme is funded by the NAMA Facility and will benefit from cofinancing from both the Government of Mozambique and Belgium. As part of the programme, a new environmental tax on packaging will be introduced, which will secure the operational sustainability of the infrastructure in the medium and long-term. Enabel is also facilitating discussions with the Governments of Mozambique and Belgium for the structuring a debt-for-climate swap, an innovative financing mechanism whereby Mozambique’s sovereign debt with Belgium can be canceled in return for a commitment to devote the freed-up resources to local climate-related spending. The countries are thereby particularly looking at ways on how the freedup resources could be applied to avert and minimize economic losses and damages from future climaterelated extreme events. To be continued. Website: https://institute.global	
Social innovation as a catalyst for the Sustainable Development Goals In December 2022, Enabel organised the first edition of #EnablingTheFuture in Brussels. The full-day event brought together more than 150 social innovators from Europe, Africa and the Middle East to exchange experience, share knowledge and get inspired. With only seven years remaining to meet the Sustainable Development Goals, there is a need to step up efforts and support and accelerate innovation as much as possible. In the words of our Managing Director Jean Van Wetter:  “I encourage our staff and partners to resolutely challenge the status quo.”  Because, although contexts may differ between countries, social innovators are working on innovative solutions to similar challenges: citizen science to combat air pollution, coding programmes to help vulnerable and young people find a job or ways to support women in their fight against sexual violence. These all transcend borders.  Challenging the status quo also means realising that a solution that works in a particular country or situation is not simply reproducible everywhere. The work of Andrea Jimenez, assistant professor at the University of Sheffield, focuses on innovation in the development sector. Copy-pasting the Silicon Valley model, regardless of the context, is a recipe for failure.  
© Enabel - Tomix Pix	© Enabel - Tomix Pix / illustration - CartoonbaseGerald Abila, founder of Barefootlaw, a not-for-profit 	organisation that aims to provide legal advice to all in Uganda, argues for a broader perspective on scaling. I encourage our staff and partners to resolutely That is why Enabel is committed to strengthening local initiatives and looking at how successful innovations can challenge the status quo. be scaled up.Jean Van Wetter  The first edition of #EnablingTheFuture brought up many 	Managing director interesting ideas. This is only the beginning. Enabel 
Organisation 
Public-law company Enabel is a public-law company with social purposes, established by the Law of 16 November 2017. The Belgian State is the sole shareholder and is represented in the General Meeting by the Minister of Development Cooperation.Enabel implements Belgium’s governmental cooperation policy. The agency actively explores assignment opportunities of third-party donors in view of strengthening Belgium’s international development policy. Enabel can also carry out and coordinate international cooperation initiatives of Belgian federal instances. Thus, Enabel is the interface between Belgian federal public instances and Belgian or foreign donors for international development, especially in low- and middle-income countries.Management bodiesGeneral Meeting The Minister of Development Cooperation represents  the Federal State at the General Meeting of the agency. In 2022, the General Meeting was held on 3 May.  Board of DirectorsThe Board is composed of members who have proven and useful expertise in international development, development cooperation and business management. The members of the Board are appointed for a renewable term of four years. In 2022, the Board convened eleven times. The board members were: Delphine Moralis (chairperson), Caroline Amrom, Karla Basselier, Brigitte Boone, Alain Coheur, Farah Dehon, Nicole de Moor, Amélie Derbaudrenghien, Guido Gryseels, Patrick Itschert, Louise Ringuet, Bart Staes. On 28 June 2022, Nicole De Moor took the oath of office as State Secretary for Asylum and Migration; from which point onwards she no longer was a member of Enabel’s Board. Patrick Develtere is her successor since 1 January 2023. The Director General of the Directorate for Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Aid of the FPS Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation represents the said Directorate in an advisory capacity on the Board of Directors. Managing director The Managing director is responsible for the daily management of Enabel. He is appointed by the Board  for a renewable six-year term. Management CommitteeOn the recommendation of the Managing director the Board appoints by an absolute majority the members  of the Management Committee for a renewable six-year term. The Management Committee is composed of  Jean Van Wetter (General manager), Martine Brisse  (HR Director), Sven Huyssen (Operations Director),  Danny Verspreet (Finance & IT Director), Liana Hoornweg (Sectoral and Thematic Expertise Director). In 2022,  the Management Committee convened 24 times. Liana Hoornweg resigned on 22 December 2022. Her employment contract expires on 28 February 2023 after observing the statutory notice period and in agreement with the Managing director. Martine Brisse’s term is not renewed and ends on  28 February 2023.Control bodies • Government’s Auditors (Development Cooperation  & Budget) • Board of Auditors (Court of Audit & registered auditors)• Internal Audit IntegrityEvery day, we have to gain the trust of our donors, the partner countries and the people for whom we work. Trust is not just a matter of words but is gained at all times by irreproachable behaviour, by respecting rules of behaviour and by professional due care. The values that our actions are based on are respect, integrity, engagement and responsibility. Enabel’s Code of Conduct is the cornerstone of our organisation’s ethical engagement. It incites all staff members of Enabel to behave in an ethical and responsible way everywhere in the world, even if circumstances are difficult. Moreover, communicating and promoting this Code with, in particular, our partners and suppliers, clearly expresses the values that underlie our relations. In 2018, Enabel, like other Belgian international cooperation actors, signed an Integrity Charter and engaged to reduce the risk of integrity violations and  to treat incidents in an appropriate manner.
Organisation chart
ColophonBelgian development agency Rue Haute 147 - 1000 Brussels Belgium T +32 2 505 37 00 info@enabel.beEditor:Jean Van Wetter, Managing directorEditing and layout: EnabelCover photo: © Enabel - Eppo Karsijns - Red Pixl Media enabel.be open.enabel.be Follow us on:Reproduction of this publication is permitted provided the source is acknowledged. Published in French, Dutch and English.23#EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-2023#EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-2023#EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-2023#EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-20232#EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-2023#EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-2023#EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-2023#EnablingChange - Activity report 2022-20232